This is David Cruz.
Daryl Lane.
Not all of it.
I've read Conan the Conqueror, and I've read most of the other things, but I have read
all those pastiches, and I've read that AC-11 series, and I've read all of it.
Have read the canvass?
I've read some of them.
That might be his best.
It might be.
Mickey's a much-mongered, shade person.
Howard Woods.
I've read more of it than Charlotte has.
I've read things besides the Conan stuff.
I'll have to say with a short story.
Well, first one I ever read was the Valley of the Worm.
Yeah.
Didn't he think his westerns would be what he was remembered for?
He would be his best.
He was turning towards westerns when he died.
That he said he was going to start riding westerns during entirely.
Yeah.
We're going to catch the noise outside, but let's just lie.
Well, I could close those blackout curtains if you think so.
That might help a little.
Daryl, speak to me for a second.
Testing, one, two, three, four.
Testing, that's too close, isn't it?
Right here?
No, no, no, no, but at some playback.
Yeah, but right here is where you want me to speak.
We'll see your levels right here.
Go ahead and talk.
Testing, one, two, three, four.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think they cut down on the noise.
This would be the first full-length book on Howard Wright, biography type.
Yes, the last kill because they only thought.
Okay, hang on.
We're not, okay.
Yeah, and that wasn't really a...
Bill talked to me for a second.
It's a vowel, baby.
Yeah.
Okay, how's that?
All right.
The cam is done.
Louder, or slower, slower, closer.
Which is a biographical.
But it's only about 50 pages.
Yeah, I'm not familiar with that one, I guess.
It looks about like a magazine.
Okay, one, two, three, four, five, six.
He did the all-time back.
Okay, two, three.
He was the publisher.
But this would be the first full-length.
I guess you can't find it.
Well, I guess it could be.
Okay.
He's a pro-chair over here.
He could talk into it.
She's like...
Mike Fry.
As I said, don't worry, we edit this.
You know, you ought to see after we do a show, tell jokes and laugh and everything else.
He edited some out.
Okay.
Am I coming across?
Definitely, but Lou, you're out there.
Uh-oh, sorry.
I got it.
There.
Okay, Darryl.
Are we on right now?
We're going.
Oh, okay.
We'd like to know some things, Dr. Loughlin, about the camp's forthcoming biography of Howard.
For instance, how you became associated with the camp and if you're helping with the book
and data publication, anything?
Okay, well, I am helping very in a minor capacity.
He came to Brownwood in 1978 to do research for the book, and I met him then, and I have
looked up several things for him at the Beard County Courthouse about Howard's insurance
policy that was left to his mother about his car, about what his estate was.
I've looked up a lot of things at Brownwood High.
His grade report from Howard Payne Business College.
Just a few things like that is the way I've helped him.
Well, what have you seen of the book so far?
What kind of approach does he seem to take?
Is it a literary criticism or a biography?
The idea for the book actually came from a woman named Jane Griffith.
She's dead now, but she was a psychologist at the University of Pennsylvania, I believe.
They're in Philadelphia in the area where they live.
She suggested, well, actually they were talking about the trouble they were having over a
Conan copyright, and they were mentioning the Kirkendall women, and not that they were
giving them problems, but they just mentioned the name.
This Jane Griffith, who was a friend of theirs, said, well, I know some Kirkendalls, and she
said, really?
Where are they from?
She said, Ranger Texas, and they just came and glued.
They said, these are our ladies.
What do you know about them?
She said she'd gone to high school with the daughter of Dr. Kirkendall.
Jane suggested that they write a psychobiography.
That is the approach.
It's very heavy, psychological.
The second chapter, I believe, is titled Dark Valley Lord.
This is about his father's influence in the young boy's life and how he could have been
a symbol of the dark valley lord, which would not account for some of the very emotional
storming relationship he had with his father.
In other words, the attempt to explain maybe why he wrote the kind of fiction he did because
of the upbringing and the life that he had?
Actually, the approach that Jane Griffith had in mind was to explain why he committed
suicide when he did.
She was interested in it from a psychologist's point of view, and that a cancer worker
interested in it from a literary point of view.
What does his psychology tell us about what he wrote?
They used psychology that way.
Then Jane Griffith died several months ago, and she'd only done the first six chapters
with them.
The last half is going to be done totally without her input, even though she'd done a
lot of research and work on it and commentary for them.
I think it's going to be a little less of a psycho biography than it started out to be.
I'm picking up some peas.
It's okay.
We all got them.
Is the camp comfortable with that approach to Howard?
I remember once in one of his earlier articles about Howard, he said that it wasn't up to
him to psychoanalyze and far be it from him to explain Howard's work or to look at his
life.
Getting involved with a book like this now, is that?
I really feel that he's fairly comfortable with it.
If you read Lovecraft's biography by the camp, he uses a lot of psychology in that, too.
In fact, many of the fans were infuriated.
They thought he was a little bit heavy-handed on the psychology.
In the literary swordsmen and sorcerers, in which he has a chapter on Howard, he uses
the word schizoid to describe him.
He goes to great length to explain that this is not the same meaning as schizophrenic, but
that word has offended people like Lindsay Tyson and Tevis Clydesmith.
Their approach is whether he's calling him crazy.
I think, really, the camp is more inclined towards psychological criticism than that
comment you read would indicate.
Do you think that Howard had serious psychological problems or the kinds of?
I don't think there's any doubt that he did.
Is it as simple as a domineering father and a possessive mother?
Well, I don't know if it'd be that simple or not, but certainly those were contributing
problems.
The father was not really so domineering.
He was as possessive as the mother was.
Everyone blames her, but he was terribly upset when a girl would come by to see Robert.
You know, and say, oh, mama, does this mean we're going to lose our boy?
No, and she'd say, we're not going to lose our boy.
She was more confident.
They had a very emotional relationship with Howard and his father.
They would have these stormy scenes and then these very emotional reconciliation with each other.
So there was definitely family problems there of some sort.
I don't guess any psychological problems is simple.
He was born a little bit late in life, our first child.
His mother was 35, 36, I think, was born.
They had considered adopting a child before he was born.
Perhaps he was just, I've seen a picture of him when he was four years old with the long curls.
You can just tell that he was his mother's pride and joy.
He was an only child?
Yes.
I understand that he did, what, have suicidal thoughts or...
All his life.
Oh, he did.
At least as early as high school he was talking about suicide.
Now, Lindsey Tyson says that he never mentioned suicide to him,
but Howard kept his friendship with Tyson separate from his literary associations.
He would go hunting with Lindsey Tyson or they didn't actually shoot anything.
He just went trapping around with a gun in their hands.
But that's why Lindsey Tyson did not hesitate to loan him the gun that Howard shot himself with.
Howard had his own gun while he borrowed friends to shoot himself with, no one ever knew.
Yeah, I understood that it was the gun that he'd carry with him in his car.
It was in the glove compartment of his car, but it was Lindsey Tyson's gun.
In fact, I said no one knew why he borrowed a friend's gun,
but people have speculated that his father knew he was considering suicide
because he had said things to his father like, are you going to go with us?
Daddy, you know, us, that he was going to go when the mother went.
They knew she was in her terminal illness.
And they speculated perhaps Dr. Howard had hidden his handguns with, you know,
that's just speculation, but he did borrow it from his friend Lindsey Tyson.
You might back up and explain who Lindsey Tyson is.
Okay, Lindsey Tyson is a resident of Cross Plains.
He lives there today.
He was a close friend of Howard.
They met in junior high, I believe.
Howard came out for basketball.
He was so domineering, I guess is the word.
He didn't want like team play.
He was not good at team sports.
He just wanted to rush in there and get the ball himself.
And consequently, he had a little trouble with the coach and the other players.
So he felt like he had been rejected.
He was an outcast.
And Lindsey Tyson was one of his friends, one of the few friends he had really in junior high in high school.
And they were close off their adult lives.
In fact, Howard would not even walk on anyone else's property.
And you know, out in the country, a small town, when you're walking in the town,
you could cross anybody's past or yard you want to.
He wouldn't walk on anyone else's property except Lindsey Tyson's.
He would walk across his farm, but no one else's.
They say sometimes he would walk miles out of his way to walk, you know, to go by the road rather than to take a shortcut across somebody's pasture.
I had one more question about his mother.
It seems to be the immediate impetus for his suicide was his mother's pending death, I guess.
Didn't the nurse tell him that she wouldn't come out of the coma or something of that effect?
Was that the reason or does this have a longer history?
I mean, was it simply the last straw?
I think it's a longer history.
I think he couldn't function in a world without his devotion to his mother.
He didn't have any purpose in life.
Jane Griffin, the psychologist, has speculated that because of the worry with his mother's last illness that he couldn't ride either.
So he didn't have riding as a release for his emotions.
And all of his emotions have been released through his riding or through his mother.
And not having her, he just couldn't function anymore.
But it's a lifetime, 30 years of not functioning without your mother.
So that's a possibility.
What is the inscription on the tombstone, say?
They were beautiful in life and they're not separated in death.
Something like that is from Wordsworth that Dr. Heidel picked it out.
He chose it. They're beautiful together in life and they're not separated in death.
When did Dr. Howard die, his father?
I want to say 1948, but that may be too late. It was in the 40s.
That was what, some 20, over 20 years later, in fact, he lived on then, right?
Or no, I'm sorry.
That may be.
No, no, he died in, Howard in 36.
36.
So that may be sometime in the 40s, I would have to check.
Yeah.
Yeah, the psychology of Howard, of course, is fascinating.
I assume that's why, you know, why this book is taking the approach it is.
But Dr. Kreider, what, I suppose any author would put himself into his work,
whether he wants to or not, you know, you can't hardly help that.
How much of Howard do you think came out in his heroes, Conan or Brandt Moore or any of them?
I probably shouldn't even speculate about that.
But Howard, there are all the stories about Howard walking down the street and doing the shadow boxing
and fencing, things like that.
And I would assume, probably incorrectly, but I would assume that there was probably a lot of him in Conan
and some of the other heroes or at least.
I think that it was a wishful feeling.
Right, he liked to think that there was a lot of him in those heroes.
But he would have been had he not been so psychologically crippled.
Well, didn't he actually believe, how, I'm not sure if he believed this or not,
but didn't he often write that sometimes when he was writing, it was like he was being possessed by
by heroes or forces or things from the past?
Maybe lived these past lives that he dreamed these past lives.
I don't believe he ever said he was possessed.
He didn't use that one, but he said it was as though Conan were standing at his shoulder,
there beside him.
And his philosophy of which story is it is it beyond the Black River?
Is that the one where he talks about barbarism at the end?
He talked about that quite a bit.
I'm not talking about how the barbarians will prevail.
Hmm. One tends to get the feeling of that in a lot of his books.
The specific statement of it is in one story that I can't particularly remember,
but I've often wondered whether Howard believed that himself or not,
whether he liked to think that that was true.
I think that again, it was a sort of explanation for why he did not fit in with other people.
He liked to believe I am the last barbarian.
It's because in my time, who will prevail, he liked to believe the other people had a veneer of civilization on them
that got them away from the basics that were really important.
And if you've read his correspondence with Lovecraft, they had long arguments about the physical versus the intellectual needs of a society.
And Howard would say that in the tough country where he lived, you had to be physically fit,
and he spent a great deal of his life, his adult life, trying to be physically fit, boxing and working out.
That's the whole thing.
But I think it's more of an excuse that these other people have intellectualized or have adopted some kind of pansy religion or something like that.
And I'm not. I'm one of the originals in my time to survive.
What do you think about some reasons why Howard wrote?
I read contradictory things on this.
For instance, once he said, I do it for the money. If it wasn't for the money, I wouldn't write.
In other places, he said, well, as we've been saying just a few moments ago, he seemed to have a need to write.
What do you think of his actual motives? Was he clear on them? Did he have a sense of himself as doing a useful job of writing, or was it just for the money?
I don't see how it could have been for the money considering what he was paid for some of the things that he wrote,
especially when he first started out. He wasn't selling that much.
Just some poems and short, very short stories to weird tales. He didn't get much, but he certainly didn't quit writing. He kept on.
Pardon me. He also said when he was nine years old, he told the Postmistress, I want to say it was not Wanger Crosscut, I believe, when he was nine years old.
He told the Postmistress that he was going to go up to be a writer and write stories about pirates. So he at least had the idea from the time he was nine years old.
And certainly he was not thinking about money then.
I knew that. Well, that's all you wanted to do? Yeah. Okay. I got one.
When did Howard first start writing and get published?
I believe his first publication that I know of was in the Brownwood High School newspaper. And some of those are running around town here somewhere, but I've never made eyes on them.
I understand they had some of them on display at the 50 year reunion that would have been in 1973.
What about his first national publications and weird tales?
It was the first. Tavis Clyde Smith, he was going to Howard Payne at the time in business school and he was living in a house that's over by the,
underpass, just about a block or two from where we are right now.
And he got the acceptance and Tavis Clyde Smith said, I believe it was Lindsey Tyson who told me this, that he opened the letter.
It was an acceptance that he had received many rejections from other magazines before.
He said he fell down on his knees and thanked God that he had made this sale, jumped up and said, now it won't be so hard.
Now that I'm finally broken in, I'll have a better chance at selling something over.
Is it true that when he lived in cross planes, you know, the last, what, what, 10 years? How long was he in cross planes?
I lived in cross planes when he, in his junior high.
Oh, okay, that long. Okay. Well, when he was earning his money as a writer, say at the, oh, year two before his death, was he making, I read a statement, more money than anybody in cross planes?
That's what Jack Scott says.
You think that's true?
For depression. Now this is depression days course.
The story in Brownwood is that he was the only man either in Brown County or maybe just in cross planes who could afford to buy a new car and pay cash for it.
And he was the only one who paid income tax one year.
It was only one in cross planes who had to pay income tax.
And when he died, he did have a car that was only one year old.
It was a Chevrolet that was a year old and maybe not even quite a year.
And he had paid cash for it and he did leave some money in the bank and he had a paid up insurance policy made out to his mother.
She survived it by 11 days.
So his father had to go through this legal rigmarole since his wife didn't leave a will so that he could collect this insurance policy.
Was he helping to support his mother?
Was there any kind of?
Oh, I feel certain that, that he did.
And at least he said so in his letters now again.
Maybe he wanted to feel that he was necessary to his parents.
His father was making enough money that he mentioned in his letters that the cost of medicine was so expensive and the things that they needed was very expensive.
I'm kind of interested also in Howard's consciousness of himself as a writer.
Did he think that he, in your opinions, of course, do you think that he thought of himself as a writer who would be remembered as anything more than a person simply making a living as an author?
Didn't he have a consciousness of himself as possibly being remembered as a regional writer of the Southwest for some of his Western material?
Or, I mean, you know, just his own attitude about himself as a creator, as an author who would be remembered.
Any ideas about that?
As far as I know, the only thing that I've even heard would be about the regional, the Southwestern material, some of the Western stories.
I don't know that he ever thought that these other stories were that literary or maybe even that important.
You know, he cannibalized some stories that he would write, set in one time frame, he would go back and rewrite them using other characters.
Not that that would make any difference, I don't guess.
But I think he did have a desire to be remembered. He wanted to be a great artist.
And I think that's why he decided to do an epic of Southwest.
That's what he told Lovecraft, he wanted to do. He wanted to do an epic of Texas and the Southwest and he wrote this long genealogical thing saying he had a feel for it because his people had been here and his grandfathers had been in the Confederacy and all this, that and the other of why he had this strong feeling for it.
But I think he was looking for something. As you said, he knew that the stories he was writing at the time probably would not be remembered immortally.
He would be quite surprised, I think, to find out Conan's popularity today.
But he had a desire to be remembered and he was looking for a medium in which he would excel.
I think it was Lovecraft, I know for Lovecraft for sure, but I think some others too who said that had he lived and had he continued to write that he would have written more regional, more Western stories, perhaps the epic of the Southwest.
That's what DeKant thinks.
Yeah, and DeKant thinks the same thing, that he would be remembered for that.
Did he do any work in that direction beyond his Breckenridge, Pike Bearfield?
Yeah, okay. Beyond the work that he had published in the field of the West, are there any notes that you know of or any kind of attempt to start an epic of the region?
Not a start for epic, no. There were some fragments of other Western tales found in those two trolls and manuscripts that DeKant dug up.
Dr. Kreider, we may have to cut this. I'm not sure I'm going the right direction here.
Don't worry about it.
Have you read any of his Western work?
Only a few stories.
I've heard DeKant read one that he thinks very highly of. I forgot.
About shooting off the air.
Right.
Well, what I wanted to ask about that, I've read most of his Western work myself.
People have said he had a feeling for the idiom of the West, the regionalisms, the atmosphere and so forth.
But it was still, what I've read is still the pulp.
What? The pulp environment, the pulp formulas for the stories.
Do you think he, did he have his roots deeply enough or a feeling for the West deeply enough where he could have written a realistic kind of Western material?
Could he have become the Louis Lemur?
No, no, I mean more seriously. I mean a good but great literature.
Did he have the talent or was he so imbued with the pulp environment that...
He may have had the talent, but I certainly don't believe he was capable of writing realistic fiction.
He was not that closely tied to reality himself.
I don't believe he ever could have written realistic novels. He had derived fantasies of some sort.
He may have had the talent, but I don't think he had the personal realism to do it.
His Western material, most of it that I've read is humorous.
Probably right.
Right. I think that's what DeKant admires.
Yes.
It's the humorous aspect of it.
And he seems to think that that might have been the direction he was going more to the humorous Western than the realistic Western.
Of course we have to say a little bit of DeKant in that conclusion because DeKant writes humorous science fiction.
And you tend to think, well he would have become more like me.
And in fact it's DeKant's life-heartedness that some people can't forgive him for.
They accuse him of making Conan into a huckish character, which was not really in Howard's original audience.
Conan certainly wasn't very huckish. He wasn't very funny.
Well at the risk of outraging all the Howard fans, and Charlotte keeps saying maybe he had the talent,
but where is that really in evidence in the stories that we have of Robert E. Howard as a great writer or a great stylist or,
I'm not sure that there's any evidence of that.
I think he was a fine pulp writer, and I don't have anything bad to say about his pulp work,
but I don't know that he would ever have broken out of that pulp ghetto and be accepted by what we might call the approved literature standards.
Since he was writing for Money Towards the End, he definitely was.
It would be very hard to break out of the pulp syndrome that he was in because he was having to write what people wanted to read.
Now I think parts of Conan are fairly literary, but then you'll get to a fairly good point,
and then he'll have another one of those wrestling matches with a giant snake,
the same formulas that he's used in a dozen other places, and they get very old and very trite.
But there are a paragraph or two at a time where it sounds as though he really did have a command of the language that I like.
I like the sound of it.
And also though he was interested in history and studied art and art, there are a lot of inaccuracies.
Go ahead and back that up. He was interested in history.
Although he was interested in history and studied it and had a lot of books in his collection,
he can't find a number of anachronisms in some of the Conan manuscripts and even changed one or two of them in some of those pastiches that he did.
Yes, I believe one was the stirrups that you mentioned that had him in stirrups before there were stirrups.
But since this is a completely imaginary world and how boy in age had a way, we know they didn't have stirrups.
Yeah, but I wonder whether he would have been a...
You know, he's not...
No, okay. You needed to lead in on something.
I wasn't going to change the subject.
Okay, we were talking about...
Stirrups.
Well, that would fit right in doing research, blah, blah, blah.
She just mentioned that he wore stirrups and that was out of context.
And you were just saying...
I was just saying that I don't know if he had ever written westerns other than the humorous kind,
whether he would have had the stamina or whatever is required to do accurate historical research.
And it might be that he would just have relied on old family stories and things like that.
Yeah, a lot of the books that I noticed in the library here at Howard Payne were the Lowell Thomas History Series,
which is somewhat colorful and not exactly accurate.
And Dr. Laughlin has the list of his books that we have, and we can confirm that.
He did have, I'm sure, some more solid kinds of historical research,
but I don't think that's what his personal taste was inclined to.
I think he would have relied not even so much on family stories as he would have on his own reading.
And he read things like Robert Service novels.
He had that said one, two, three, four, five, six of those.
Sorry, I was counting.
Okay, wait, wait, okay.
Mic up and talk about the Robert...
He had...
I was saying that I thought that Robert Howard not only would have relied upon family stories,
but even more so he would have relied upon his own reading of fiction.
And his taste in fiction doesn't seem to be too high.
He read things like the Robert Service novels.
We know that there were six Robert Service books in his personal library that his father donated to Howard Paine.
Micah, what were the Robert Service novels?
Well, he wrote several different kinds.
He wrote Robert Service poetry.
And Robert Service wrote poetry, but it was...
I won't...
How would you describe it, Bill?
I haven't read them.
Well, I read this kind of thing when I was growing up.
They're very melodramatic.
His war stories were very melodramatic.
And you have this lone hero and he's so noble and so good.
But I would not say that Robert Service writing is really realistic.
He had a lot of sax-roamer books in his collection.
Also, the Oriental, Exotic, Romantic type of thing.
I just can't picture Howard as a realistic writer in any way.
Well, he had to get almost all of his...
What do you want to call it? Inspiration for his fiction?
Buy his reading from his reading because it's sort of an...
Another of DeKamp's points is that that's a weakness in Howard's work is that he never traveled to see these things.
He never really got out of cross planes.
He did a little, but not much.
In fact, some of the incidents in his novels you can find in other novels that he had read.
And I'm sorry, I can't remember the specific examples.
We do know that, I believe it was Simeron by Edna Farber.
He told Lovecraft, he wrote Lovecraft, that this incident had really happened in cross planes.
And it was an incident in Simeron.
Well, Howard relied heavily on the reading that he did.
Is that okay?
He relied so heavily on it that in his letters he actually...
No, wait a minute. Go ahead and start again.
I have to have room to edit the clicks and stuff out.
Howard relied heavily on the reading that he did.
He relied on it for his fiction.
Also, he claimed that some of the incidents actually happened in his own life.
He wrote Lovecraft, that an incident in which something was blown up in an oil field.
I can't remember exactly what it was, and that you had to be in great physical shape
because this man was able to catch it in his arms and run with it to save the lives of all of these people.
But the incident did not happen in cross planes.
It happened in the novel Simeron, which was in his personal library, which was done in Tyler Penn.
So he had such a slight grasp of the reality or such slight experience in the world
that he actually had to claim things from novels to have been in his experience
to have things to write about to people.
Who are some of the other authors that he would have had in his library that he liked to read?
So, you know, the writer, the creator's of fiction.
I had about six Conan Doll books.
I was wondering how much influence the Conan series and Brian McMoron and all the barbarian type series had
from Egyrace Burrow's books that I noticed he had a few of those.
Well, I'm really not qualified to tell you that.
He had one that I say, the Beast of Tarzan.
Well, Tarzan and Conan are similar enough.
Outcasts. I mean, they don't actually fit in with the fun of the male type of person, I mean.
Which is what Howard wanted to be.
Away from civilization. Superman, sort of.
Isn't it sort of strange? This is sort of a summation, I think, of what we've been saying.
To have a writer of fantasy, particularly the kind that Howard wrote,
which I associate mostly with the northern environment, I suppose.
Coming from the Southwest, from such an arid landscape, from such a small town,
you know, was so little traveling in his life, he would have had to have gotten everything from his imagination from books
because he had not experienced any of that.
To me, that's always been sort of a paradox.
Part of it was, I think, his interest in the Celtic heritage.
Wasn't that one of his big things, the belief in his famous or royal ancestors, which may or may not have existed,
like Dr. Laugh, I'll tell you.
He claimed that he was full blood Irish, and they were the Irish kings, like some other people we now claim to be.
But there's no evidence that he certainly was not full blood Irish.
People have traced his genealogy, but this was part of his image of himself.
He was trying to project other people and trying to create for himself.
There again, he wrote at one time that he wrote about the barren, cold, windswept, damp areas, even though he lived here.
I think that again might be a sort of wishful film, and who wouldn't like to be someplace where it's cold on a day like this.
He wanted to be away from where he was because I don't think we can underestimate the anger and frustration
that was boiling around in Robert Howard all the time.
I see it in all of his poetry, and a great deal of his fiction.
Cross Plains neighbors say that he had a, there was a big tree stump out by his yard, and I believe it was a sledgehammer, not an axe.
And sometimes in the middle of the day, he would go out there, you know, and he would just see that he was so tense,
and he would take that sledgehammer and he would just wham it and wham it and wham it on this tree stump.
That a tremendous amount of anger, he didn't fit in with other people.
He wanted to be somewhere else, so he wrote about something that was like nothing he had experienced.
It's hard not to psychoanalyze a guy like that, right?
And see the barbarian chopping the heads off, and see him out there whamming the tree stump.
You really can.
In other words too, you think that perhaps his theory of the, what, the ancient heroes of the past sort of reliving,
or their force, their power, whatever you want to call it, their heroic action, sort of living in modern men,
he sort of saw himself as an ancestor, or what, a remnant of that kind of ancient hero?
I descend that the last one left, the one who didn't, didn't...
The last count.
Yes, he saw himself as the last count just about.
Well, he didn't, he wouldn't go so far as to believe in reincarnation, would he?
Sometimes it almost sounds like it.
I'm not that good with it, but I really doubt that he actually believed it.
I remember, and I forget, I think the character's name was James Allison,
a Valley of the Worm, I think, in one of his works.
He is, I think he's on the point of dying as James Allison character is, and he's like Howard, he's a remnant.
He's a powerful individual, a great hero, he doesn't fit, but he's in the modern world.
And he recalls the heroes from the Dragon Slayers, the Worm Slayers from the past,
all the way back to an original, I think, who was called Njord, who killed a huge worm-like creature,
back in prehistory, and Allison remembers all the incarnations that this hero's force had passed through to get to James Allison.
Which makes you wonder how much H. Ryder Haggard was in his library.
Was there any? That sounds a lot like H. Ryder Haggard's heroes.
There again, I don't think, I don't know how seriously you can take anything that Howard said he believed,
because he was constantly trying to create an image of himself and project that to other people.
So I don't think we can say he did believe in reincarnation or he didn't.
If he said outright that he did, it doesn't mean that he did.
He was interested too in all kinds of sports, wasn't he? Boxing, football, manly sports?
He did not like football, didn't like any kind of team sports. He liked boxing, he liked the idea of fencing.
The sports he was interested in, well he did go to football games some,
but from his experience with the basketball team when he was a young boy, he was not good at team sports,
he couldn't cooperate with other people, and he saw the truly admirable sports to be the one on one.
He's been a good hockey player, where he's whacked people over the pail.
What's he a good boxer, do you know? I mean, you said he took care of himself, he was very interested in physical fitness.
And is there a picture of him in the last cal, striking the hose with the fists up?
But I don't know of any actual fights that he ever got into.
No, I don't believe so. To answer your other question, he had three H. Ryder Haverd books in his library.
Alan Quatermain, is that the title? Yeah.
Ancient Alan and People of the Rest.
That's a good surprise.
Dr. Loughlin, can you tell us something about the discovery of the Howard manuscripts and the controversies and the problems that have come up in that area?
Yes, a little bit of it.
Elsbraig de Camp really didn't get interested in Howard until...
And in ten minutes it's going to do it again. Ten minutes?
So talk for ten minutes.
Just start it right here, right where you...
Yes, Elsbraig de Camp didn't get interested in Howard until about 1950, when he first read Calden and the Conqueror.
Perhaps it was 1949, but it was around that time.
Then, I don't know how you say it, is it Jorn Nieburg?
Jorn Nyberg.
Jorn Nyberg wrote him that he had written a Conan type of book to practice his English and asked Mr. de Camp to redo it.
And I believe he was trying... Mr. de Camp was trying to sell this story to Don Woham, or he was...
For some reason he was discussing it with Don Woham.
And Woham said, well, I understand that Oscar J. Friend has a whole box of unpublished Howard manuscripts, which you'd be interested in those.
And Mr. de Camp just came unglued. Yes, I'm interested in the very next day.
He went rushing over to Oscar Friends and asked for the box. I don't know if he had to pay for them.
Oscar J. Friend was a literary agent associated with Otis Klein literary agency that Robert Howard used.
And he still had this box of things. It was in... That was in November of 1950.
So actually Mr. de Camp was the one who found the first hoard of manuscripts.
And then a little later, it was either Friends or Klein's daughter inherited that literary agency.
And she did not want to handle Howard manuscripts. She didn't like the stuff.
And so she told that a camp said, have to find someone else.
And Mrs. de Camp wanted to be the literary executor. But Mr. de Camp didn't think this would be fair.
You see, because they had the manuscripts, didn't mean they had the copyright.
The copyright was still owned by the Kirk and Dolls because Dr. Howard had left the Kirk and Dolls everything,
which included the rights to his son's copyright.
So they were having a deal with the Kirk and Dolls.
And Mr. de Camp thought it might be a little bit fair for his own life to be the literary executor.
So he called Glen Lord. He had never met him. I don't believe they had corresponded.
He was just a very active fan. And he asked Glen Lord to do it, which of course they agreed to do.
And he took his job very seriously. And he traced down a second box of unpublished manuscripts in California.
When Robert died, his father seemed to find it very painful to have things of Roberts around the house.
So he gave them away. He gave away baby pictures. Very nice studio portrait baby pictures.
He gave away all of his manuscripts. And he gave one box, I believe, was to Clark Ashton Smith.
It was someone in California, a writer with whom Howard had cordial correspondence.
And he felt very grateful to the people who had had cordial relations with Robert because he had so few friends.
So his father gave all of them presents, mementos of Robert.
And whoever this writer was, it may have been Smith, loaned the box of manuscript to a fan.
And the fan never returned them. He couldn't get them back.
And then in the meantime, Clark Ashton Smith or whatever the writer was, and the fan both died.
And the box of manuscripts is in some of the things that the family goes through.
And they don't know what they are or what to do with them. So they're just stuffed off somewhere in the box and forgotten about.
And then Lord managed to trace that down. Sort of a little detective hunt.
But he had to go on to find them. And he did find that in 1965.
And he had to buy them from, you know, buy the physical manuscripts. He didn't have to buy the copyright.
But he had to buy them from whoever had them at the time. And that was far none as close some.
I understand it was sizable in 1965.
Do you think we have all of Howard manuscripts today? Or might there still be some around?
There's always rumors that there are some around. You know, it was when Dr. Howard gave the library to Howard Payne,
there were rumors that he also gave the manuscripts. We do know that he gave copies of the pulp magazines that Howard had been published in.
And at some time, Dr. Howard came and retrieved the magazines. He told his friends that the students were reading them to pieces.
And that's why he came to get them. The story around Howard Payne is that the librarian thought that the ladies on the covers of weird tales
and the pulp magazines were not quite far-belonged at a Baptist university.
So she hid them in the basement of Old Main, which is the building right now.
And he got rather damp down there than were ruining. So that's why the father got them.
The story, there's a story that T. R. Havens, who was a historian here.
And the librarian, another librarian, well, she was not a librarian. She was a secretary or something.
Lena Vincent, Tuit Vincent's sister, Tuit Vincent was a close friend of Howard, who he lives in Austin now.
That Lena Vincent and T. R. Havens realized that this librarian was going to throw out a bunch of this junk that she thought was un-Christian.
So they put it in the back seat of their car and someone said the whole back seat was full and it included manuscripts.
And people have even, it might have been, in large, someone actually saw one of the manuscripts in Dr. Haven's desk here about 15 years ago.
And he had a type script that he pulled out and showed. But Dr. Havens is now dead.
His widow is now dead. And if there was anything there, we'll probably never hear from him.
I think also an extension of that kind of confusion is the, what happens today if you walk into a bookstore and go to the fantasy section,
you'll find at least three publishing houses publishing the Howard material.
I think it's Berkeley and Bantam and Ace, I believe it is. Or is Lancer a fourth one?
Lancer has gone out of business. Now that's an interesting story too. That's part of the controversy of the publication of what happened.
And part of the zebra business is also, it's still with Lancer.
Because Zacharias or whatever his name is was associated with both of them.
The Lancer books were authorized. They were paid a certain amount for them. Nothing exorbitant.
When Lancer went out of business, I believe it was Mr. Zacharias, took some of the things to zebra books.
Then Lancer sold to someone who was buying up bankrupt companies.
And they were claiming a law under which a company that does not go bankrupt but reorganizes does not lose the copyrights.
In the contracts they had, they had a bankruptcy cause. And if the publisher went bankrupt, they got back the copyrights.
But they were in court for years on that.
And in the meantime, Glen Lord and some others sold the rights to Berkeley.
For what Mr. DeCamp thought was a pittance or something like that, I understand.
But sure enough, they lost the suit. And Lancer was allowed to claim.
You should have taken out the hook.
Glen Lord and some of the Conan group felt certain that they would win the lawsuit with Lancer.
So they went ahead and sold the rights to the Conan material to Berkeley Books.
And Berkeley started producing the books, publishing them.
But in the meantime, they lost the lawsuit. Lancer won.
They were allowed to claim that it was a reorganization, not a bankruptcy.
So the copyrights did not return for the publishing rights.
And the reorganizer, the person who had actually bought Lancer out, had sold the rights to Ace Books.
And Ace had already produced them all, that 12 numerical series of Conan books.
They were all ready to go. And when this decision was reached in, I think, March of 77,
they rushed them to the market immediately.
And the writers and the Conan people didn't get any money.
And they actually called it a kind of piracy.
But they settled that out.
Of course, they didn't engage a lawyer, author, Lieberman,
who had them organize what he called Conan properties,
which has made Conan a registered trademark so that not anybody can use it.
And I don't know exactly who all the members of Conan properties are,
but it includes DeKamp and Glen Lard and Arthur Lieberman the lawyer.
And I want to say Kirby McCauley, who was the literary agent.
And there are two others. I believe there are six people, so people who are members of that.
Is there an authorized publisher at the present time?
Bantam is doing the new pastiches.
And so far as I know, Ace is doing all of the older things.
But I don't know about an authorized publisher.
Is this by agreement among themselves?
Like Bantam does the pastiches, you say?
Just the pastiches? Dr. Crater, is that correct?
Well, not entirely, because they've done the Solomon King books and some of the others.
But I know that recently Ace has been issuing the Conan originals by Howard,
that is the reprints of the Conan series are being done by Ace, apparently.
I don't believe anything is done by agreement among themselves.
There's tremendous lawsuits that go on over the whole thing.
I'm certain Conan properties had to settle with Ace about what they could do.
Now the writers of the pastiches can deal with the publisher directly,
but a portion of anything they do that is a Conan pastiche has to be paid into Conan properties.
And Glen Lorde's literary agent gets 5% off the top of that.
Now he was not always a literary agent, Kirby McCauley was,
but Glen Lorde, I believe now is the one who gets the 5%.
In other words, a publishing house can contract with any author to do a Conan book,
as long as it's a pastiche and a certain percentage is given to the estate.
Well, the Conan properties has to agree to let you use that name.
And they don't agree to let just anybody use it.
And if they agree to let you use the name, a certain percentage of your profits has to be paid to them.
How many authors are doing pastiches or have none?
We don't know of Andy Offit, Paul Anderson, Al Sprave Camp, Len Carter,
DeKamp and Carter in collaboration, Bjorn Nyberg,
and DeKamp in collaboration.
Who have we left out?
Now, as we said, I think Carl Edward Wagner was planning to do one.
He did one, didn't he?
He did one, and planning to a second, that one never appeared.
But I believe he did do one.
So that would be another one.
He did one in a band-aum, series of six.
What about those kinds that you just meant?